Why is a volcano like a cone?

For the same cause for which a molehill is like a cone, though a very rough one; and that the little heaps which the burrowing beetles make on the moor, or which the ant-lions in France make in the sand, are all something in the shape of a cone, with a hole like a crater in the middle.  What the beetle and the ant-lion do on a very little scale, the steam inside the earth does on a great scale.  When once it has forced a vent into the outside air, it tears out the rocks underground, grinds them small against each other, often into the finest dust, and blasts them out of the hole which it has made.  Some of them fall back into the hole, and are shot out again: but most of them fall round the hole, most of them close to it, and fewer of them farther off, till they are piled up in a ring round it, just as the sand is piled up round a beetle's burrow.  For days, and weeks, and months this goes on; even it may be for hundreds of years: till a great cone is formed round the steam vent, hundreds or thousands of feet in height, of dust and stones, and of cinders likewise.  For recollect, that when the steam has blown away the cold earth and rock near the surface of the ground, it begins blowing out the hot rocks down below, red-hot, white-hot, and at last actually melted.  But these, as they are hurled into the cool air above, become ashes, cinders, and blocks of stone again, making the hill on which they fall bigger and bigger continually.  And thus does wise Madam How stand in no need of bricklayers, but makes her chimneys build themselves.

And why is the mouth of the chimney called a crater?

Crater, as you know, is Greek for a cup.  And the mouth of these chimneys, when they have become choked and stopped working, are often just the shape of a cup, or (as the Germans call them) kessels, which means kettles, or caldrons.  I have seen some of them as beautifully and exactly rounded as if a cunning engineer had planned them, and had them dug out with the spade.  At first, of course, their sides and bottom are nothing but loose stones, cinders, slag, ashes, such as would be thrown out of a furnace.  But Madam How, who, whenever she makes an ugly desolate place, always tries to cover over its ugliness, and set something green to grow over it, and make it pretty once more, does so often and often by her worn-out craters.  I have seen them covered with short sweet turf, like so many chalk downs.  I have seen them, too, filled with bushes, which held woodcocks and wild boars.  Once I came on a beautiful round crater on the top of a mountain, which was filled at the bottom with a splendid crop of potatoes.  Though Madam How had not put them there herself, she had at least taught the honest Germans to put them there.  And often Madam How turns her worn-out craters into beautiful lakes.  There are many such crater-lakes in Italy, as you will see if ever you go there; as you may see in English galleries painted by Wilson, a famous artist who died before you were born.  You recollect Lord Macaulay's ballad, "The Battle of the Lake Regillus"?  Then that Lake Regillus (if I recollect right) is one of these round crater lakes. Many such deep clear blue lakes have I seen in the Eifel, in Germany; and many a curious plant have I picked on their shores, where once the steam blasted, and the earthquake roared, and the ash-clouds rushed up high into the heaven, and buried all the land around in dust, which is now fertile soil.  And long did I puzzle to find out why the water stood in some craters, while others, within a mile of them perhaps, were perfectly dry.  That I never found out for myself.  But learned men tell me that the ashes which fall back into the crater, if the bottom of it be wet from rain, will sometimes "set" (as it is called) into a hard cement; and so make the bottom of the great bowl waterproof, as if it were made of earthenware.

But what gives the craters this cup-shape at first?

Think—While the steam and stones are being blown out, the crater is an open funnel, with more or less upright walls inside.  As the steam grows weaker, fewer and fewer stones fall outside, and more and more fall back again inside.  At last they quite choke up the bottom of the great round hole.  Perhaps, too, the lava or melted rock underneath cools and grows hard, and that chokes up the hole lower down.  Then, down from the round edge of the crater the stones and cinders roll inward more and more.  The rains wash them down, the wind blows them down.  They roll to the middle, and meet each other, and stop.  And so gradually the steep funnel becomes a round cup.  You may prove for yourself that it must be so, if you will try.  Do you not know that if you dig a round hole in the ground, and leave it to crumble in, it is sure to become cup-shaped at last, though at first its sides may have been quite upright, like those of a bucket? If you do not know, get a trowel and make your little experiment.

And now you ought to understand what "cone" and "crater" mean.  And more, if you will think for yourself, you may guess what would come out of a volcano when it broke out "in an eruption," as it is usually called. First, clouds of steam and dust (what you would call smoke); then volleys of stones, some cool, some burning hot; and at the last, because it lies lowest of all, the melted rock itself, which is called lava.
